The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is space exploration.
We're putting two limitations on that subject. One, that the exploration be outside the solar
system, and two, that the story or novel we discuss involve the process of searching or
exploring primarily, not simply the result of the exploration.
And especially with those limitations, I think we have perhaps the purest of all science
fiction themes or plots. Man's history on this planet has been a process of searching,
discovering, then taming or civilizing. The discovery of the New World, for instance,
was the result of a deliberate act of search by various European explorers, culminating
with Columbus. The American West, as discovered and mapped by Lewis and Clark, is a classic
example of exploration. Now, space, or our galaxy, the universe, is simply the next area
to explore and discover and tame. I think the importance and purity of the theme lies in
the notion that searching and discovering is the very essence of human nature. It's
at the center of our survival instinct. Without it, we wouldn't be human.
We've conquered the frontiers of Earth, and now we're ready to confront, we must confront,
what one influential science fiction production is called the final frontier.
Star Trek first came on the air in 1966 and continued through 1969 with 78 episodes being
completed for the series. The show had several major science fiction authors writing for it,
including Harlan Ellison, Theodore Sturgeon, and David Gerald. It would be hard to think of a
better example of the space exploration theme. I think Star Trek epitomizes that because episode
after episode, you saw the members of, crew members of the Enterprise confront aliens,
all sorts of problems in a hostile universe, but they kept going, their spirit, their courage,
their desire to go beyond mankind's limits almost. It carried the show for a long time,
and I think it sort of is the essence of the space exploration theme, for pure exploration's sake.
It was a fairly popular show when it was on the air, but it gained in popularity considerably
after it went off the air and went into syndication. Conventions are held, Star Trek conventions,
and it eventually spawned a movie. Well fitting in with your parameters on space exploration,
we never saw the Enterprise going on a particular mission to do something in particular. It was
always just out there exploring, and with no particular thing in mind, and whatever happened
to it seemed to happen by accident, or just, it just happened. They were out there in an alien
ship advanced upon them, or they found some planet with a distress signal calling out,
but they were never really going to any particular place as far as we were told.
I believe that really is kind of covered in the preamble to the show, where William Shatner says
they're on that five-year mission to explore new planets and discover what's out there.
I think that has to be one of the reasons the show is so popular again, because simply it
satisfies people's need for the unknown, for the search, for the exploration, to seek something
which is mysterious, which is unknown. It's simply caught the imagination, I think, of more than
pure science fiction fans. I think everybody was fascinated with that kind of theme.
I think this is especially shown in the episode called The Side of Paradise.
Yes, I think they did that theme a number of times, or not a number, but every so often. I think
that particular episode is the best expression of it, but they advanced to this particular planet
and beamed down as they did on their transporters. There was a particular planet on this planet that
shot spores whenever one of the crew members got near it. These spores would seemingly
cause a state of total happiness, total contentment in the individual. He didn't have a sense of
a goal. He didn't want to strive. He simply wanted to stagnate. I'm reminded of the poem by
Tennis and the Lotus Eaters, where the crew of Ulysses ate the lotus plant and wanted to stay on
the island forever without moving, without striving, without trying. Kirk, the captain,
Captain Kirk is one of the few who was not infected by the spores. With the power of his
personality, his cleverness, he is able to overturn the influence these spores have had
in his crew members. I think the significance of it is that they are going to continue. They're
not satisfied. They're not content. They would have been perfectly happy to live the rest of
their existence on this planet. It was sort of an Eden, a paradise, but that's not enough for
people. They need a goal. They need something to strive for, or they're not human. Kirk is able to
get the crew members back to their original states and the enterprise goes on.
For an example of a novel that deals strictly in this type of space exploration, let's turn to
a novel called The Voyage of the Space Beagle. It was written by A. E. Van Vote in 1950. It's actually
a collection of four short stories that he tied together with a new character. The original
short stories were Black Destroyer and Discord and Scarlet written in 1939, M-33 and Andromeda
written in 1943, and War of Nerves written in 1950. These four stories he took and tied together
with the theme of going out and exploring space with these four episodes becoming four things
that happen to the ship and the people on it. In each of the stories, we meet a different kind of
alien and have to deal with it in a life and death situation. The first of these episodes
takes place from the crew lands on an alien planet and is discovered by a creature named Curl.
Curl is a cat-like creature and he soon lures his way on board the ship. The scientists are very
eager to study him and see what his physiological makeup is like and how his psychology has adapted
into this type of planet and generally what he is. Elliot Groesfiner, the main character that ties
the stories together, is somewhat suspect of Curl and his suspicions are well founded. In an
accident they discover that Curl can control electrical energies through his body and once
Curl discovers that the human beings have learned this from him, he becomes immediately very fearful
of them. He's a very very powerful creature and they lock him inside a cage but he manages to
negate the electronic lock and get out and starts horribly killing the crewman
and then running back to the sail and locking him back inside it hoping to create a panic on board
the ship. The crew almost immediately discovers what is happening and becomes a war between the
crew and the creature and in the end Curl leaves the ship by means of a lifeboat because he doesn't
understand the faster than light drive on the ship. He attempts to fly back toward his planet
but he's traveling away from his planet faster than he is traveling toward it when he leaves the
ship and even though he's flying toward his planet his planet still recedes into the distance
and he goes insane trying to figure this out. The second episode in the book which is one of
the original short stories is about a race of aliens that are very bird-like called the rim
or the rim people. They have an entirely mental existence they communicate by telepathy and
they try to contact the space beagle with their mental emanations through telepathy
and they're friendly all they want to do is contact the ship but it creates havoc on the space beagle.
This mental power that enters the spaceship drives some of them in mad it causes psychological
aberrations it brings out hostilities it exaggerates certain mental conditions in the crew
and Grossfiner the the same one who was suspicious of Curl in the previous episode is able
with his specialized equipment to mentally contact the rim to let them know what's happening and
ask them to call off their attack which is done and the space beagle is allowed to continue.
The third section of the book deals with a somewhat different type of alien. The space
beagle is voyaging between galaxies in intergalactic space where there is absolutely nothing when all
of the sudden they come across the path of an alien who seems to be floating in this intergalactic
void. The alien had no hope of ever reaching one of the galaxies he was stranded out there
when this ship just happened to pass by and the alien immediately taps some of the energy from
the drive of the ship and stops the ship dead in its tracks. The humans crawl out of the ship and
fix the exterior and then they notice the alien floating right by the ship. The alien comes aboard
the ship after they try to capture him in a cage and immediately recognizes the situation
as being very advantageous to him. This creature is extremely powerful and he's from an ancient
civilization that existed in the previous cycle of the universe. When that universe exploded this
creature was shot out into the place where they found him without any hope of gaining access to a
galaxy. When he meets the men he is able to use them as host creatures or bodies for his eggs
in order to raise up more of these creatures. The Ixtel as the alien is called in the book
takes over part of the ship and it's really a race between him and the rest of the humans
as to who's going to control. If the humans allow him to gain the upper hand he will eventually
control all of the galaxy that they're going to. The only way that the humans could rid themselves
of Ixtel was by using their mental agility and leaving the ship long enough that they could
impose a force field of energy that would kill the creature. The creature found out what they
were doing just in time to escape and he got back into his original fix floating out in middle of
intergalactic space with no hope of ever gaining access to the galaxy as the humans went on to
their next episode. The last one involves the creature very difficult to describe it's sort of
a cloud a huge cloud creature without any particular name but it feeds on death it started out as a
very small small organism. First of all it fed on the deaths of insects then smaller animals and
larger animals. It kept growing all the while and it's gotten so huge that it needs the the death
of creatures on an entire planet to exist. So it's gained the power and the size and the strength
to terraform planets and as the space people goes through a particular system they find that
all of the planets they're passing are similar. They're covered with tropical vegetation with large
primitive kinds of animals engaged in conflict which leads to to many deaths that this creature is
feeding on. The scientists on the space beagle figure out what's happening and realize that their
own solar system is in great danger because this creature is expanding all the time and they're
afraid it's going to come to their own solar system. So they devise a plan whereby they
they start destroying the planets that the creature is feeding on and lure him out into
interstellar space where he is not allowed where he's not able to feed so that he is going to he
will we know die away from the source of the death which nourishes him. So again through their cleverness
through their ingenuity the the humans have triumphed over an alien which when you come right down to it
is much more powerful than they are. And I believe that typifies a lot of the things in the novel in
that the humans are always overcoming their adversaries by means of their cleverness. They
seem to outwit aliens that are much more powerful than they are physically and in some instances by
specialized powers that they have. Curl could manipulate electromagnetic energies and Ixtel
could move through solid matter but even with these abilities the humans by their own ingenuity
could outwit their adversaries. I think we should say something for the aliens though.
In most of the pulp novels of the time that this one was written we have so many of the bug-eyed
monsters that are nothing more than monsters. Here we have aliens that are truly intelligent and
are fighting the humans on a much greater level than just physical terror. They they're well thought
out. They have purpose and a plan. We can say that these are really better aliens than what you
would expect to find in most of the pulp novels of this time. I think that tradition that change in
the way the bug-eyed monsters were were written about in science fiction came back in the 30s with
Stanley Weinbaum, Martian Odyssey. Asimov is described that as the first science fiction story
in which the aliens are not simply humans in a strange form. They have their own reasons for
existing. They have their own ecology. They they belong to a particular planet and they're part of
that planet. I think all of the aliens in this particular book are the realistic in terms of
having an ecology built around them and having a psychology, a physiology which is not human.
How shall we characterize this novel and is it pulp fiction or is it something superior to that?
Well when Van Vogt started writing the stories he was writing in the pulp tradition. It was still
in the late 30s when he started to write these these stories which became the space beagle.
But I think he goes beyond that. He has a even though he was trained in the pulp tradition I think
he has a more skill. He's more modern perhaps under the influence of the editor John Campbell.
And he's able to go beyond the pulp formulas. These are realistic aliens. The humans in the
book are characterized by by realistic motives. They're not simply the the plain hero types.
They have their quirks. They have their their bad points to humans. In fact they all they all have
to overcome the bad parts of human nature before they can defeat the aliens themselves. So I think
this is a step beyond the pulp tradition even though the formulas and the all the intentions
of the story I think are the same as the early pulp magazines. But Van Vogt is able to go beyond that.
For our second consideration we turn to a novel by Paul Anderson written in 1970.
Tau Zero is a special kind of a science fiction book. There's not very many just like it.
That's only one category that Anderson writes with is the kind of book that Tau Zero is.
He writes almost anything. He writes pure fantasy. He'll write so-called soft or social science fiction.
But there's nobody better at writing hard science fiction than Paul Anderson. I think Tau Zero is
perhaps his best example in that particular form because there's a great deal of science in the
book and some readers might even think that it's a little obtrusive if they don't understand some
of the concepts of relativity and the Bussard ramjet for instance. The science in the novel
actually makes it extremely realistic. It's one of the more believable of the pure space
epics that's ever been written. The story is essentially that of a colony ship. A ship full
of people I think about 50 people who are traveling to a colony at a nearby star to set up and start
life there. And on the way after they've gone part of the way toward the star the ship runs into a
small nebula of gas which causes the ship to lose its power of deceleration. They cannot decelerate
without causing so much radiation harm that they would they would all be killed. The only way that
they can hope to exist is to keep on accelerating until they can get to a place that is relatively
free of gas where they can go outside the ship outside of the protective barriers
and shielding of the ship to repair that deceleration device. The story that develops is that the ship
cannot find a place that is free enough of gas that they can go out and repair the ship
and it keeps on accelerating until it's actually going through galaxies. But no matter how fast
they go they can never go beyond the speed of light because Anderson as we said before is extremely
true to the scientific knowledge of our day and according to the knowledge that we have
faster than light travel is impossible so he has to dream up a method whereby the
this exploration trip can go fast enough to get somewhere and he's devised or he's used
a ship called the Bussard Ramjet to do this. The Bussard Ramjet is not a new idea that was
invented somewhere in the middle of this century. The basic format is that the ship picks up interstellar
gas molecules by the use of a huge electromagnetic web of sorts a force field if you will that
scoops up these interstellar particles and shoots them out the back end. This provides
reaction mass which drives the ship forward. The point is that the faster the ship goes the more
gas molecules it supposedly will contact and shoot out the back end there by increasing
its speed more and more and more on a vicious cycle. The ship would be extremely radioactive
to the point where there would be needed extreme shielding for any human beings to
to be able to ride the thing. I believe in the works of Larry Niven he had the same kind of a
ship that was not habitable and he had robots that used this ship and everybody else had to come
along on the slow boats. Here however Paul Anderson has had this ship big enough and sealed well
enough that humans can ride it. The trouble is when they hit that gas cloud that it not only
destroyed their deceleration method it also sped them up quite a bit to the point where they were
already past where they would have had to stop and turn around and slow down to get to their
original destination. The speed of the ship is one of the basic problems the crew must overcome.
The great speed brings the theory of relativity into play. One of the basic concepts of the
theory of relativity is that the speed that time passes is relative to the speed that an object
is moving. If you have two ships traveling through space with ship A traveling faster than ship B
time will be moving slower on ship A than on ship B. In other words the faster a ship moves the
slower time passes on that ship relative to other slower moving objects surrounding it.
Everything appears normal on the ship to the crew and time seems to be passing faster on objects
traveling slower than the ship. As hours and days pass on the ship months and years pass on earth
and the faster they travel the greater this time difference becomes eventually the crew while
traveling between galaxies watches the universe collapse into a huge mass. This ties in the
current currently accepted theories of the origin of the universe by most of the scientific world.
The Big Bang theory of course in which the universe began as one monomass of energy that
explodes outward. There are two currently popular views of this. One is that the universe would
then continue to expand until it eventually burnt itself out and that would be all a one time only
affair or that the universe would again withdraw by gravitational force back into a monomass and
explode again thus doing it numerous times limitless times. This is the cyclic theory and this is what
Paul Anderson portrays in Tao Zero. The people on board the ship goes so fast that the universe dies
around them. The time has passed exterior to the ship in great quantities of course earth and all
of its peoples and assumably humankind is long gone and they are the only ones left and they're
waiting out the result of this withdrawal of the universe back into a monomass to see what happens
hopefully for them it will explode again. It's one of the things that Anderson tries to bring
across is the incredible amount of time that has passed while they've been on this incredibly fast
flight across the universe. Millions and billions of years have passed as the universe contracts
back down into one large monomass before it explodes back out and creates new galaxies,
new solar systems and at the end of the novel they eventually land on one. They're able to slow down
and they land on one and begin to colonize. And presumably then they will carry on the human race
simply from the 50 members on this ship that have survived into a new universe. To me that's one
of the most fascinating of all exploration, journeys of exploration is to see the death
of a universe in the beginning of another one. That's fascinating the way Anderson treats that
material. It's ultimately very optimistic. I think it's the essence of the exploration theme,
you know to strive, to seek, to never give up. And particularly with two characters on the book,
I think we see Anderson attempting to show two sides of human nature that allow it to persist
and to survive. You have a woman, Ingrid Lindgren, who is second in command on the ship. She epitomizes
feeling, emotion, love, compassion. We have Charles Raymont, who is the, I guess you'd call him the
policeman, the only military man on board who is there to keep order. He is pure practicality,
pure survival. He'll do anything to survive. He's very an emotional, very practical man.
Together those two are able to keep the crew intact. They're able to give it hope. And they are the
ones who are able to well allow the crew to survive into this new universe where you know where
humanity will keep going. The voyage of the space beagle and tau zero I think we would call
two of the more classic treatments of the space exploration theme. But there are many
and ingenious methods, many varied ways that authors have come up with to illustrate that
particular theme. Always I think showing the desire of the human spirit to escape any kind of restraint.
One early example I think of and probably still one of the more popular ones is the idea that
Heinlein illustrated in Orphans of the Sky published from two earlier short stories in 1941.
He uses the device of a generation ship which is an artificial world, complete and self-sufficient,
constructed and inhabited by human beings, which is sent slowly toward the stars.
The original members won't live to arrive of course, but their descendants will. Many generations
removed. And that is one method of space exploration although one which is a little discouraging I
guess to the original crew. In the film Dark Star the protagonists are traveling throughout our
galaxy discovering new solar systems which have habitable planets on them and destroying all
the unstable planets in that system in order to make the system safe for colonization. And one of
their rather unusual story we might mention is by Larry Niven. It's called Rammer. It was a short
story and then made into a novel, a world out of time. Here a corpus sickle, a person who has had
himself frozen in order that he might be revived later for medical treatment. I think the fellow
had cancer or some such disease. Awakes into a future society where they want him for only one
purpose or they don't want him at all and that's to pilot a starship. The fellow is amazed but he
goes along with it because it's his only hope for life. Takes the starship and escapes away from
the society that has programmed him to do their seeding of planets that they want him to do and
goes out on his own to explore the galaxy or whatever he finds that meets his interest.
Space exploration is the cornerstone of postulative fiction for the earth is well known and has become
a very small place in a very big universe. If man is to leave the earth as he has already begun to do
he will have to explore whether it's for the sake of exploring or for practical reasons of
colonization and exploitation or both. Although there are science fiction stories that do not deal
in off earth settings the majority by far are based on the assumption of space travel and exploration
as we try to imagine what could lie ahead for humanity in the worlds of tomorrow.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane and David Carson. This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCVFM
and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.